
title
Understanding The Broken Business of Spotify

tags
spotify economics
does spotify make money
how does spotify make money
why spotify keeps losing money
why spotify loses money
why spotify is not profitable
is spotify profitable
spotify finances
how much money did spotify lose
the economics of spotify
the finances of spotify
is spotify a good business
what is spotify business model
spotify's business model
spotify's failed business model
spotify's problem
spotify business model fail

description
Spotify is a $50B+ company, but they have never turned a profit. But why does Spotify keep losing money? The answer to this question becomes more clear when we take a deeper look at Spotify's business model. The current music streaming industry has become very competitive. Adding on to this is the fact that these services have to work with a very consolidated music recording industry, which is run by a powerful oligipoly of three companies. All these facts make it difficult for Spotify to turn a profit, despite the fact that the company has over 530 million active monthly users. 


#spotify #spotifyeconomics #whyspotifykeepslosingmoney

Fetching subtitles in English (auto-generated) (en)...
few other companies have revolutionized
an industry as radically as Spotify has
revolutionized the music industry
instead of paying to download each song
We want to listen to Spotify lets us pay
a monthly fee to access a virtually
unlimited number of songs similar
streaming services existed prior to
Spotify but they limited the number of
songs you could listen to each month
what made Spotify the Undisputed king of
music streaming is that it completely
removed this cap and made it possible
for people to listen to as many songs as
they wanted and this strategy worked the
service has over 574 million monthly
active users of those 236 million are
premium users paying a monthly fee and
this is translated into billions in
Revenue in 2023 Spotify reported revenue
of over 13.2 billion e as we can see
their revenue has consistently grown
over the past few years despite all of
this Spotify has a problem as this graph
shows Spotify has never made a profit in
2023 the company reported a net loss of
over
532 million e so how come Spotify keeps
losing money well the problem starts
with spotify's fundamental business
model let's take a deeper look spotify's
business model is quite simple they
generate Revenue primarily from two
sources monthly paying users which
account for the majority of their
revenue and ads on ad supported
subscriptions every time a song is
streamed Spotify pays a small fee to the
artist or the record company as of right
now Spotify pays somewhere between 0.3
to 0.5 C for each stream and this model
of paying for each stream is largely
responsible for spotify's negative net
income this is spotify's income
statement for 20123 look at the cost of
goods line item this line item
represents the total amount paid to
artists and record companies as we can
see the company paid out over 9.8
billion in streaming fees this means
that for each Euro in Revenue the
company pays 75 cents to the music
rights holders this leaves only 25 cents
for Spotify to pay for other costs like
Staffing marketing content hosting
design legal and more which is obviously
not enough now that we understand why
Spotify keeps losing money let's examine
some possible solutions and evaluate
whether the would work the first and
perhaps most obvious solution is just to
lower the royalties it pays out Spotify
is the leader when it comes to music
streaming so why doesn't the company use
this power to force artists and record
companies to accept lower royalty fees
the problem with this idea is that the
companies to whom Spotify pays royalties
are also very powerful see the music
record industry is an oligopoly made up
of three large companies Sony Music
Warner music group and Universal Music
Group control of over 70% of the music
recording industry artists sign the
rights of their music to these companies
in exchange for marketing promotion and
distribution help meaning that it is
these companies that Spotify pays
royalties to and these three companies
furiously fight a possible decrease in
royalty fees and even threaten to remove
their music cataloges from Spotify if
this decrease is to happen having just
one of these companies pull their
content out of Spotify would be
catastrophic for the
let's take an example where Universal
music group is unhappy with the fee
Spotify pays and decides to Stop
Licensing its content to Spotify music
by Major artists like Taylor Swift Drake
Adele the weekend and many more would no
longer be available to stream on Spotify
overall Spotify would lose the rights to
the entire catalog of 4 million songs
owned by Universal this in turn would
mean that a huge number of Spotify users
would stop using the service and would
opt to use one of spotify's competitors
as this example illustrates music
companies have enormous power over the
streaming industry which makes it
difficult for Spotify to negotiate lower
royalty fees another possible solution
for Spotify would be to increase their
prices based on 2023 numbers Spotify
would turn an operating profit if its
Revenue grew by just 20% so why doesn't
Spotify just increase its subscription
price by 20% well this is also difficult
to do considering the competitive
landscape of the mus music streaming
industry the music streaming industry
has become quite crowded Apple music
Amazon music YouTube music and 10cent
music are some of the other big players
in the industry despite this the
industry is all very homogeneous all
streaming services have access to all
music cataloges it does not matter
whether you use apple music or Spotify
you can listen to any song you want with
either service this means that each
streaming player offers the same
identical service to the other players
in the industry and this is the reason
why all these services are priced
identically since there is no
differentiation between these Services
customers are quite price sensitive so
if Spotify were to increase its
subscription price customers would
simply move to another cheaper streaming
service in fact out of all these major
players in the industry Spotify is
perhaps in the worst position for a
price increase see apple music and
Amazon music are Services provided by
already profitable companies meaning
that apple and Amazon can afford to lose
money on this service as long as it
means that more people are using the
apple or Amazon ecosystem additionally
these companies are using music
streaming to push their service bundles
which might be more profitable Apple 1
is a subscription service that allows
users to bundle up to six Apple
subscriptions Apple music Apple Fitness
Apple TV plus Apple arcade Apple news
plus and iide plus so Apple has combined
services that lose money with services
that make money to offer a bundle that
ideally should generate profits the same
goes for Amazon which offers a prime
bundle that combines Amazon music with
prime delivery Prime video Prime gaming
and more Spotify increasing its
subscription price would benefit these
companies the most because it would mean
that more people stop using spotify and
sign up for another streaming service
like apple music these new users would
be more exposed to the Apple ecosystem
making them a target for Apple to
promote its bundles or even its Hardware
like the iPhone and the MacBook as we
can see decreasing costs through
lowering royalty fees or increasing
Revenue by charging higher prices are
deeply flawed Solutions this leaves
Spotify with one other possible solution
expanding into new markets and this is
exactly what the company is trying to do
Spotify CEO recently claimed that the
company is trying to become the largest
audio Company spanning audio books
education Sports and news and Spotify is
already taken its first steps towards
this Vision the company has spent more
than $1 billion to build a podcasting
Empire making deals with Kim Kardashian
the Obamas Prince Harry and Megan Markle
and Joe Rogan part of the company's
Ambitions in podcasting is to make money
from its own shows and expand its
advertising Revenue by selling ads
across other networks and Publishers
shows spotifi has invested heavily in
its ad business including developing
technology to insert ads via streaming
which allows it to more precisely track
ad Impressions and other data and
creating its own ad Marketplace which
allows advertisers to buy spots
targeting audiences rather than on
specific shows but whether this strategy
will work remains to be seen as of this
writing spotify's podcasting strategy
has become somewhat chaotic some of
their big names have already stopped
working with Spotify and when we look at
the company's financials they suggest
that podcasts might not have turned out
to be as profitable as the company
expected as we can see Spotify is in a
very tough position within its industry
on the one hand the powerful music
record companies are eating away at
their profitability and on the other
hand competitors are stagnating
spotify's Revenue growth and it will be
interesting to see how the company
navigates this fragile situation in the
future
